---
layout: default
title: Home
---

This website serves as my ePortfolio for the CS-499 Computer Science Capstone with Southern New Hampshire University. Throughout this ePortfolio, I will share a professional self-assessment, a code review demonstrating my improvements towards my original artifact, and my three major enhancements in Software Design and Engineering, Algorithms and Data Structure, and Databases.
My progression through the Computer Science program at Southern New Hampshire University and through the Capstone for this program shows that I have demonstrated proficiency in the following five outcomes: 
- Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science
- Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts
- Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices
- Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals
- Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources

---

# Professional Self-Assessment
  The journey I have traversed at Southern New Hampshire University in the Computer Science program alongside my skill refinement within the program’s capstone has helped me transform from a learning student within the field into a career-ready professional through extensive applications and exposure to real-world problems, communication, and solution development. I have learned in detail about a variety of topics related to the discipline as well as expanded my knowledge through interdisciplinary studies, and through my coursework I have worked to hone my skills related to critical thinking, problem solving, adaptability, and understanding complex structures and systems. In tandem with my coursework, I have also refined communication skills with both technical and nontechnical audiences, teamwork with colleagues, and time management.
My experience with teamwork and collaboration in the world of computer science began in the same place that my passion for software development and computer science truly blossomed, this being my time from elementary school all the way to high school immersed in the world of FIRST robotics. After deciding to narrow down my decision on my career path to computer science, I was able to apply the skills I learned there directly to what I have learned with my time here at Southern New Hampshire University. On the technical side of the team, we had subdivisions that focused on building, designing, and programming the robot, all of which I spent time in, with a majority of that time being spent in the programming sector. With my particular focus on programming, I was able to learn about the use of multiple languages such as Java, LabVIEW, and Python in the application of robotics, and through the application of good practices, this knowledge followed me into my pursuance of my Computer Science degree. It would be an incomprehensive discussion of my tenure without acknowledging the background I came from that provided me with the passion and understanding I possessed related to the field before my time at SNHU.

  I started my journey at Southern New Hampshire University with most of my general education credits out of the way which resulted in a majority of my studies with this institution being focused on the study of my major. However, in my interspersed interdisciplinary studies as well as in my major-related coursework, I spent a significant amount of time learning how to hone my communication skills in front of both technical and nontechnical audiences. Within courses that focused on the software development lifecycle and operating architectures like CS-250: Software Development Lifecycle and CS-230: Operating Platforms, I produced coursework and communicated with peers in both technical writing through detailed descriptions of system architecture and requirements and nontechnical writing that illustrated purpose, intent, capabilities, and limitations of systems and software to audiences who are less acquainted with the technical aspects of these structures. In my more advanced programming courses like CS-210: Programming Languages and CS-360: Mobile Architecture & Programming, there was an additional need to both assess and document requirements of complex applications and the systems they possessed, develop adequate software to meet these requirements, and produce this software alongside language explaining technical function and nontechnical application usage to end users. These projects also recognized the need to produce systems that were accessible to users and adequately communicated functionality to stakeholders without technical understanding. Without exception, the courses I took at SNHU in every subject facilitated an environment that required a deep technical understanding of the projects I worked on and a need to be able to translate this understanding to all audiences. 

  Another skill that I demonstrated in every course I took at SNHU without exception is the skill of collaborating in a team environment. Beyond the relation of this skill to communicating with stakeholders alongside other audiences, I collaborated with my peers to both provide and receive feedback on projects through peer review workshops such as the collaboration that occurred in IDS-410: Problem Solving Social Change. This course focused largely on a cumulative breakdown of a social issue and how to develop a plan to implement realistic and tangible change, and this required critical breakdowns from peers on these topics to address faults and improve each other’s work to enhance the outcome. Albeit a totally unrelated course, another course that illustrated related peer review was CS-330: Computational Graphics and Visualization, where we were able to review each other’s project submissions and provide constructive feedback on whether these projects met the necessary criteria for submission.

  Another angle of my refinement of my collaboration skills can be illustrated through the broadening of my awareness of diverse individuals and varying perspectives while at SNHU. Part of what began my personal emphasis of the value of these skills was also through robotics, especially on a world-competing FRC (First Robotics Competition) team during high school. I spent a significant amount of time with community outreach and the need to make technology accessible which was demonstrated not with our (equally qualifying) robot but with our standing for competing on the world level for the Chairman’s Award/Impact Award which represents embodying FIRST principles and transforming culture and inspiring youth to value STEM. This also resulted in interactions with students all over the world with different backgrounds through these competitions who were all connected through the passion for technology. These values were further refined at SNHU as I frequently discussed varying perspectives during peer discussion. Through courses like IDS-105: Cultural Awareness and Online Learning and PHL-260: Ethical Decision-Making and Problem Solving, I frequently collaborated with my peers through listening to and engaging with their perspectives on various social issues as well as their life experiences prior to and during their studies at SNHU. Southern New Hampshire prides itself on its diversity of students, and every interaction I had with my peers here enlightened me further on how our experiences and walks of life can vary greatly while we simultaneously all pursue the same goal of furthering our education for new experiences. These courses and experiences also enhanced my understanding of applying ethics in professional settings, and this is especially applicable when producing software that is structured and used ethically. This is especially relevant beyond my interest in software development and into my other focus on software security, as the weight of ensuring information is held and accessed ethically entered the forefront of my mind when discovering how biases can have a significant effect on particular groups.

  Beyond these broader skills that help shape professional development through the study of computer science, there is also a fundamental need to possess understanding of both the breadth and depth of technical knowledge that there is to explore in the field. My skills in data structure and algorithms, software engineering and design, databases, and security will be presented in the artifacts and the enhancements I made to them for this capstone project, but I have demonstrated similar skills throughout all of my studies at Southern New Hampshire University. I demonstrated skills of software engineering extensively (possibly the most extensively of these notable technical skills) throughout my tenure through both conceptual classes related to software architecture and operational coursework related to developing complex software. Through courses like IT-140: Introduction to Scripting, IT-145: Foundation in Application Development, and CS-210: Programming Languages, I developed numerous projects in Python, Java, and C++ that demonstrated the systemic function and understanding of software containing modular architecture. These skills also involved learning object-oriented programming principles in order to develop clean structure and adaptable software. I also have demonstrated skills in data structure and algorithms (DSA) through specific courses that focused on better understanding of these structures and the algorithms that process this data like CS-255: System Analysis and Design; in this course, I learned about creating system models to better understand structures of systems. Within the same term, I also took CS-300: DSA: Analysis and Design, which is a better specific breakdown of this category where I learned particularly how to establish different data structures like vectors, hash tables, linked lists, and binary search trees, and different algorithms to help understand how to sort and search through this data. I also have understanding about the fundamentals of Big-O notation to determine how algorithms will be most efficient. My coursework also demonstrated fundamental understanding of these structures and algorithms through pseudocode and flowcharts. I have also exhibited the skill of an understanding of databases through my implementation of these other skills into the use of data storage techniques within database management systems. I applied the use of both relational and non-relational databases through MySQL and MongoDB in courses DAD-220: Introduction to Structured Database Environments and CS-340: Client/Server Development as well as the comparison of the benefits and drawbacks of using each type of system. I was able to demonstrate the development of CRUD functionality and developing advanced queries to demonstrate meaningful search results and provide insight into what these results express in a nontechnical format.

  I have demonstrated the skill of development with relation to security during my time at Southern New Hampshire university through doing extensive research on how to thoroughly implement security concepts throughout the entire software development lifecycle. When taking the course CS-305: Software Security, I demonstrated skills related to generating certificates, deploying ciphers, demonstrating various methods of testing, and ensuring secure communications. I also did extensive research on how to determine whether software is secure through dependency checks where I determined how severe various vulnerabilities were and analyzing what exploits were commonly found through these dependency versions based on OWASP CVEs (Open Worldwide Application Security Project, Common Vulnerabilities and Exploits). I learned about how the CIA triad applies to ensuring data can be conceptually understood as being secure through proper confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Another course I took, CS-320: Software Test, Automation, and Quality Assurance, allowed for me to develop skills related to static and dynamic software testing to ensure that software is being published that has been extensively monitored for bugs and errors that present risks or poor software quality. Overall, I have studied security from various fronts, whether it be employing safe measures throughout development, thorough software testing, and understanding the value of security and how it can be implemented throughout a project with proper DevSecOps practices. I have shown particular interest in cybersecurity and took certain courses as electives to better grasp how security can be implemented and what it looks like to implement these valuable checks, and my grasp of ethical data access and software development goes hand in hand with proper security measures.

  I have chosen to substantially enhance a particular artifact from CS-360: Mobile Architecture and Programming where I developed an inventory application in a few significant avenues. I saw this project as the perfect blueprint for this capstone project; while it served as a testament to my learning at SNHU as a complex project I developed entirely from scratch featuring both back-end and front-end development, it also had significant room for improvement and enhancement in various avenues. Through my development of this project, I had to apply previous programming and system design skills to develop an application that could meet user needs and properly convey its abilities to the user. I also used skills related to databases as related to its simple application of SQLite, and it demonstrated basic CRUD functionality alongside promising room for improvement with DSA implementation. Because of the nature of this application, it provided me with an opportunity to give it a significant structural rehaul alongside the introduction of role-based access control which demanded much clearer and detailed methods related to limitations of features and functionality dependent on the user, and corresponding UI/UX changes. Further substantial structural changes occurred with the DSA improvements that illustrated proper search and sort functionality, and with this an improvement to the user interface related to these changes, new database values, proper POJO classes for helping translate database information between the user and the database, and a rehaul of CRUD functionality. The enhancements also illustrate a total rehaul with the implementation of Firebase rather than SQLite, which demonstrated significant change through user authentication, Firestore data storage, and an additional permission check on database item security through Firebase permissions (which also resulted in multi-user database access and secure login systems). These significant changes have demonstrated that I developed a complex and fully functional application for a project, but that I was able to point out the areas of improvement and provide entirely new iterations relevant to expressing the refinement of the various skills I have acquired with Southern New Hampshire University.

  My professional assessment will provide me with the skills to advocate for myself and what I am capable of through both the work I have done to showcase my technical skills as well as my soft skills demonstrated through my communication of my critical thinking and problem solving related to issues that exist within my own work, my ability to devise a plan and analyze software and its systems to improve upon it at its core while providing future room for adaptability, and my ability to reflect and constantly strive for improvement in all of my work. I am proud to be able to reflect on the passion and resilience I have poured into all of my coursework at Southern New Hampshire University and how that is reflected throughout my capstone project that illustrates a final summation of the work I have done as well as how I will continue to improve and create new meaningful work in the future.

---

# Informal Code Review
For this ePortfolio, I have chosen to demonstrate the three major enhancements using an inventory application from CS-360: Mobile Architecture and Programming. The original application features a login portal, a main activity displaying an inventory stored in a SQLite database, and SMS permissions that notify when an item has reached low stock. The following code review covers existing application functionality, an analysis for improvement of the code, and areas of enhancement in Software Design and Engineering, Algorithms and Data Structure, and Databases.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hlcshzuKRJs?si=p5SqfbURtTG-h4T3" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
